Module 1: Introduction to backend (#9)
ReCoded-Org/curriculum-backend-readings: module1-introduction-to-backend/r3.4-api-best-practices/README.md

# API Best Practices

Now that we have learnt to build our own APIs, in this lesson we will cover some best practices for API development.

Although some of these suggestions may require going through more modules of the course before implementation, consider this as a guide that you can come back and refer to at any time as you progress through the course.

## What is API design?
API design is the collection of planning and architectural decisions you make when building an API. Your basic API design influences how well developers are able to consume it and even how they use it. Just like website design or product design, API design informs the user experience. Good API design principles meet initial expectations and continue to behave consistently and predictably.

> Frontend developers need good UI design before building the product for their end users. Similarly backend developers need good API design because the users in this case are the frontend developers who will integrate with your API to build the end-user facing product.

Reviewer: Similarly,

Reviewer: i'd add a sentence saying frontend developers who integrate with your API should not know how your API works under the hood, for example ask the students if they have ever used an API, they probably have no idea how its implemented (and that's how it should be). and violating that would be a pretty egregious mistake

## Characteristics of a well-designed API
In general, an effective API design will have the following characteristics:
- **Easy to read and work with**: A well designed API will be easy to work with, and its resources and associated operations can quickly be memorized by developers who work with it constantly.
- **Hard to misuse**: Implementing and integrating with an API with good design will be a straightforward process, and writing incorrect code will be a less likely outcome. It has informative feedback, and doesn’t enforce strict guidelines on the API’s end consumer.

> - **Complete and concise**: Finally, a complete API will make it possible for developers to make full-fledged applications against the data you expose. Completeness happens over time usually, and most API designers and developers incrementally build on top of existing APIs. It is an ideal which every engineer or company with an API must strive towards.

Reviewer: i would add something in that it hides the implementation and developers need to know nothing about the implementation (aka has a clean interface)

For example, if we want an endpoint to get the comments for a news article, we should append the `/comments` path to the end of the `/articles` path.

In Express, we can write this as:
```
const express = require('express');
const bodyParser = require('body-parser');

const app = express();

app.use(bodyParser.json());

app.get('/articles/:articleId/comments', (req, res) => {
  const { articleId } = req.params;
  const comments = [];
  // code to get comments by articleId
  res.json(comments);
});

app.listen(3000, () => console.log('server started'));
```

4. **Handle complexity elegantly**
The data you’re trying to expose can be characterized by a lot of properties which could be beneficial for the end consumer working with your API. These properties describe the base resource and isolate specific assets of information that can be manipulated with the appropriate method. An API should strive towards completion, and provide all the required information, data and resources to help developers integrate with them in a seamless manner.

> However, instead of defining more resources and endpoints to cover dynamic use cases and relationships, you can sweep properties and limit responses behind the ‘?’ in a query parameter, or isolate specific component of the data the client is working with using a path parameter.

Reviewer: perhaps emphasize there is no right or wrong answer here but you should consider what would be cleanest in terms of the user perspective, and sometimes either option could be ok. or in general, i imagine a student asking "when do i add a query parameter vs using a route"?

const express = require('express');
const bodyParser = require('body-parser');

const app = express();

// employees data in a database
const employees = [
  { firstName: 'Jane', lastName: 'Smith', age: 20 },
  //...
  { firstName: 'John', lastName: 'Smith', age: 30 },
  { firstName: 'Mary', lastName: 'Green', age: 50 },
]

app.use(bodyParser.json());

app.get('/employees', (req, res) => {
  const { firstName, lastName, age } = req.query;
  let results = [...employees];
  if (firstName) {
    results = results.filter(r => r.firstName === firstName);
  }

  if (lastName) {
    results = results.filter(r => r.lastName === lastName);
  }

  if (age) {
    results = results.filter(r => +r.age === +age);
  }
  res.json(results);
});

app.listen(3000, () => console.log('server started'));
```

7. **Maintain good security practices**
Most communication between client and server should be private since we often send and receive private information. Therefore, using SSL/TLS for security is a must. A SSL certificate isn’t too difficult to load onto a server and the cost is free or very low. There’s no reason not to make our REST APIs communicate over secure channels instead of in the open.

> People shouldn’t be able to access more information that they requested. For example, a normal user shouldn’t be able to access information of another user. They also shouldn’t be able to access data of admins. To enforce the principle of least privilege, we need to add role checks either for a single role, or have more granular roles for each user.

Reviewer: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Principle_of_least_privilege perhaps link to this, in general for security things brief explanations are usually not sufficient (but i understand why they are there), i would suggest inlining further readings for those interested

> If we choose to group users into a few roles, then the roles should have the permissions that cover all they need and no more. If we have more granular permissions for each feature that users have access to, then we have to make sure that admins can add and remove those features from each user accordingly. Also, we need to add some preset roles that can be applied to a group users so that we don’t have to do that for every user manually.

Reviewer: consider concrete example or further reading, for example something from ehre
https://www.google.com/search?q=express+role+based+authentication+framework

Author: These will be covered in the authentication module, so not going into examples here.

Also this reading includes this disclaimer in the beginning:
Although some of these suggestions may require going through more modules of the course before implementation, consider this as a guide that you can come back and refer to at any time as you progress through the course.

> 8. **Cache data to improve performance**

Reviewer: i'm not sure i would put this under API best practices, i personally actually discourage even mentioning caching to students because junior developers tend to fall into premature optimization and think they need to cache things => increased complexity => really bad bugs / confusion

Author: We will be teaching caching and when to use server-side caching in one of the advanced modules.

We can add caching to return data from the local memory cache instead of querying the database to get the data every time we want to retrieve some data that users request. The good thing about caching is that users can get data faster. However, the data that users get may be outdated. This may also lead to issues when debugging in production environments when something goes wrong as we keep seeing old data.

There are many kinds of caching solutions like Redis, in-memory caching, and more. We can change the way data is cached as our needs change.

9. **Versioning our APIs**
We should have different versions of API if we’re making any changes to them that may break clients. The versioning can be done according to semantic version (for example, 2.0.6 to indicate major version 2 and the sixth patch) like most apps do nowadays.

> This way, we can gradually phase out old endpoints instead of forcing everyone to move to the new API at the same time. The v1 endpoint can stay active for people who don’t want to change, while the v2, with its shiny new features, can serve those who are ready to upgrade. This is especially important if our API is public. We should version them so that we won’t break third party apps that use our APIs.

Reviewer: the concrete example i would give here is mobile apps, and mobile apps its usually hard to force users to update, or people may be on old versions, therefore you could still have clients that expect older versions

In Express, we can use the body-parser middleware to parse the JSON request body.
```js
const express = require('express');
const bodyParser = require('body-parser');

const app = express();

app.use(bodyParser.json());

app.post('/', (req, res) => {
  res.json(req.body);
});

app.listen(3000, () => console.log('server started'));
```

### 2. Use nouns instead of verbs in endpoint paths
We shouldn’t use verbs in our endpoint paths. Instead, we should use the nouns which represent the entity that the endpoint that we’re retrieving or manipulating as the pathname. This is because our HTTP request method already has the verb. Having verbs in our API endpoint paths isn’t useful and it makes it unnecessarily long since it doesn’t convey any new information.

For example, we should create routes like GET `/articles` for getting news articles. Likewise, POST `/articles` is for adding a new article , PUT `/articles/:id` is for updating the article with the given id. DELETE `/articles/:id` is for deleting an existing article with the given ID. Here `articles` represents a REST API resource.

> The combination of the HTTP verb and resource noun convey the purpose of an API endpoint. API endpoints like GET `/fetchArticles` or POST `/update-articles` use redundant verbs like "fetch" and "update" which is not required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The combination of the HTTP verb and resource noun convey the purpose of an API endpoint. API endpoints like GET `/fetchArticles` or POST `/update-articles` use redundant verbs like "fetch" and "update", which are not required when used with HTTP verbs.
```

  let results = [...employees];
  if (firstName) {
    results = results.filter(r => r.firstName === firstName);
  }

  if (lastName) {
    results = results.filter(r => r.lastName === lastName);
  }

  if (age) {
    results = results.filter(r => r.age > age);
  }
  res.json(results);
});

app.listen(3000, () => console.log('server started'));
```

### 7. Maintain good security practices
Most communication between client and server should be private since we often send and receive private information. Therefore, using SSL/TLS for security is a must. A SSL certificate isn’t too difficult to load onto a server and the cost is free or very low. There’s no reason not to make our REST APIs communicate over secure channels instead of in the open.

People shouldn’t be able to access more information that they requested. For example, a normal user shouldn’t be able to access information of another user. They also shouldn’t be able to access data of admins. To enforce the [principle of least privilege](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Principle_of_least_privilege), we need to add role checks either for a single role, or have more granular roles for each user.

> If we choose to group users into a few roles, then the roles should have the permissions that cover all they need and no more. If we have more granular permissions for each feature that users have access to, then we have to make sure that admins can add and remove those features from each user accordingly. Also, we need to add some preset roles that can be applied to a group users so that we don’t have to do that for every user manually.

Reviewer: same here huge overlap with @wisammechano auth module
